# Mechatronic Microcontroller Project MXEN2003

## Laboratory 7: Serial Communications

### Lab Briefing

Universal Synchronous and Asynchronous serial Receiver and Transmitter or USART is a flexible serial communication device. It is a 2 pin commmunication system using transmit, Tx, and Receive, Rx, pins for independant full duplex communication. In this lab we will be using it in asynchronous mode with each device having its own internal clock generation. For wireless communication you will be using XBee modules to connect Tx on one microcontroller to Rx on the other wirelessly.

The framework provided to you sets up USART for a baudrate of 9600 using 8 bit character sizes. It includes functions for initialising the serial communication and for writing a byte or string to serial, see serial.c.

A communication protocol defines how each device communicates accross its communication channel, in this case USART. You will need to define what is being sent/recieved by each device across the serial communication.

Some sample code is provided which you may use as a starting point for creating your communication protocol for communicating accross serial using a multi-byte protocol.

- A controller Arduino will be provided, equipped with an LCD display, two analogue joysticks and an XBee communication unit.  
  Schematic: https://github.com/mxeng/mcp-docs/blob/master/labs/controller_schematic.pdf

Below is an example of how to use the multibyte sending and receiving framework provided.

### Sending:

Example of sending two bytes every 100ms;

```c
//main function initialization
serial2_init();

//main loop
current_ms = milliseconds_now();
uint8_t databyte1 = 0;
uint8_t databyte2 = 0;

//sending section
if( (current_ms-last_send_ms) >= 100) //sending rate controlled here
{
    serial2_write_bytes(2, databyte1,databyte2);
    last_send_ms = current_ms;
}
```

### Multibyte Recieving:

Then this is an example of multibyte receiving of information using the same structure (2 bytes).
```c
//main loop
uint8_t recievedData[2];

if(serial2DataReady)
{
      serial2_getData(recievedData,2);
      serial2DataReady = false;
}
```


### Alternate Example:
The above code uses a library for interrupt driven multibyte communication. If you find this limiting you can see the example below for how to build your own communication structure to enable more flexibility to communication.
https://github.com/mxeng/mcp-docs/blob/master/code-examples/comms_sample_interrupt_controller.c

**TASK 1**

Your task is to achieve 2-way simultaneous communication between 2 microcontrollers. 
- Microcontroller one "*robot*" will read and transmit range sensor values, and control a servo motor from serial commands.
- Microcontroller two "*controller*" will read and transmit joystick values while outputting range sensor values from serial to an LCD screen.

### Before the lab
- Revise lab 2, 4 for joystick and range sensor reading
- Revise lab 6 for servo control
- Revise LCD printing
- Ensure you have read the lecture notes on serial communication
- Plan your communication protocol defining what is being sent and recieved by each device
- Read and familiarize with the USART documentation in the ATmega datasheet chapter 22
- Review the XBee datasheet

### Outcomes

1. Define the communication protocol for serial communication between the robot and controller microcontrollers.
	- Ensure it is clear how the instructions are structured and how they are delimited.
	- Make it clear what information is sent in your communication protocol.
2. Discuss any design considerations for ensuring adequate data flow:
   	- What is buffer overflow and how did you account for it.
   	- What controls the latency, how is is minimized.
4. Demonstrate the use of serial for debugging code, show that if code enters erronomous states there is adaquate error states for debuggin
5. Demonstrate functional 1-way communication*
6. Demonstrate functional 2-way communication*


Note if using the code in that example for the Robot (i.e. programming in Robot.c), replace #include "Controller.h" with #include "Robot.h"

*functional requires that it fulfills the requirements of the lab TASK
